Last week I began a teaching about grace, and this concept is spoken of often in Scripture.
and is very important to all Christian
Christian churches since Jesus' time.
and because we are united methodists who have a wesleyan focus you know john and charles wesley began the movement which eventually became.
the Methodist Church and today the United
Methodist Church.
and because we are united methodists, i began to teach about his concepts of god's grace, john wesley's.
concepts of God's grace. I said that one of the primary reasons why I'm a United Methodist pastor and quite honestly why I am a Methodist other than my
Folks raising me in that.
Um,
But one reason why I remained a Methodist is because of this idea of personal holiness and
Social holiness
that John Wesley combined.
Now, there's a fairly wide range of churches in this regard. On one spectrum, over here you have the churches that primarily speak of personal
personal salvation and a person's relationship with God through Jesus Christ. And in this case, you may hear continually about accepting
accepting Jesus as your Lord and Savior, but you may never really hear about helping the poor.
Okay?
And then on this far side over here of social holiness, you have churches who are, um,
you hear all the time about helping the poor and healing people and things like that but you may never in several months hear about accepting
Accepting Jesus Christ as your personal Savior.
Lord
and Savior.
And one thing I love about John Wesley, one reason why I'm a United Methodist and a pastor in the United Methodist Church is because John brought those two concepts
100%
together. I'm sure he's not the first, but that is one of the basic things, basic tenets, you might say, of our church, the United Methodist Church.
at his church, bringing those together.
Um,
Two together.
and so ah.
God, in John Wesley's words,
God is the one who acts.
And...
because of what god has done for us, we offer our lives back to god through a life of service.
Let's say that together.
God is the one who acts
And because of what God has done for us,
We offer our lives back to God
Through a life of service.
Does that make sense?
This is just kind of reviewing what we talked about last week.
Wesley and the early Methodists were particularly concerned about inviting people to experience God's grace and to grow in their knowledge and love of God through disciplined prayer.
I'm a Muslim Christian.
Living living
right that's where the term Methodist came from discipline Christian
And people, like one thing I said last week was people would call them Bible thumpers or Methodists.
Right?
because they were very methodical in how they did things well obviously the methodist stuck right and so instead of having it be a bad thing it was turned into.
a good thing they placed primary emphasis on christian living on putting faith and love into action and john wesley termed this practical
Cool.
Divinity.
It's a trademark of United Methodism today.
Grace is central to our understanding of Christian life.
And the Greek word...
The Greek word, you see it there, C-H-A-R-S, it is pronounced "harris".
Haris,
It is the unmerited
favor of God's
Of God, excuse me, freely bestowed upon those totally unable to return the favor.
So when we see the word grace translated in the New Testament from the Greek, it comes from this word, haris, right?
Which is the unmerited favor of God freely bestowed.
Upon those totally unable.
To return the favor.
So think about it. Who are some...
What are some instances where people have been totally unable to return the favor?
Anyone?
Who has received God's grace that can
Not return.
The favor.
All of us right
Yeah.
yeah we have we have some symbols in our society that are are people who have ah received god's grace that there's no way that in our terms they could.
They could repay that, right?
But all of us are examples of that.
In one.
Way or another.
Grace can be defined as love and mercy
It's given to us by God because God wants us to have it.
God wants us to have it, not because of anything we've done to earn it, right?
We read in the letter to the Ephesians, for by grace you have been saved through faith.
And this is not your own doing. It is the gift of God, not the result of works, so that no one may boast.
Keep that in mind, all right? Ephesians two,
Eight.
And nine.
Our United Methodist heritage is rooted in a deep,
and profound understanding of God's grace.
As I said last week, this incredible grace flows from God's love for us. And I don't know if you were here last week, but I had you quote John 3:16.
Say it with me if you know it. For God so loved the world that he gave his only son so that everyone who believes in him may know
may not perish, but have...
Anyone who has been connected to the church for very long
Knows
That scripture why is that
Why is it that we know that so much?
Well, it's because
That verse summarizes the gospel.
In one verse, you have the idea.
of what the gospel, the good news,
Is about.
The ability to call to mind
God's love and God's gift of Jesus Christ is a rich resource.
for theology.
faith and as you know John Wesley the founder of the Methodist movement described God's grace as threefold and it helps us understand you know the idea of how how do you
How do you eat an elephant
One bite at a time, right?
Well, the way John Wesley talks about this, it's kind of like eating an elephant, right? How do you understand grace? Well, you kind of break it apart and try to understand
to understand the concepts of grace. And he split it into three different concepts.
ideas or you might say if you're thinking about a timeline or a graph it could it could be timelines of grace right and anybody know the first one we talked a little bit about it
Bit about it last week.
Prevenient grace, right? What does the prefix PRE mean?
It's funny, I used
the definition to define but anyway yeah it comes before right
I said prefix. Anyway, so the pre-prevenient means it's the grace that came.
before.
Grace that came before. Then what's the second type of grace that Wesley speaks of?
Justifying grace, right? What does it mean when you're justified?
Huh?
Just as if as if
Methodist preacher speaking in tongues. I can see it now in the paper.
Just as if I never sinned.
Just as if I never sinned. And then what about the final...
form of grace that John Wesley talks about. Anyone?
Sanctifying grace right so prevenient comes before Justifying and then sanctifying grace and I'll tell you what I'm doing here and just a
In just a minute. So prevenient grace. Wesley understood that grace as God's active presence in our lives and this presence is not dependent
dependent on human actions or human response, it is a gift, right?
It's a gift that is always available and by the way, it can be refused.
Prevenient grace.
From wesley's understanding
wesley understood prevenient grace to be god's grace that stirs up within us a desire to know god and empowers us to respond.
Spawned.
To that,
The grace of God through our faith.
Does that make sense?
So in other words, John Wesley would say, "Without prevenient grace..."
We couldn't even respond.
To God in faith.
Right? So, Prevenient Grace.
comes before. We don't have to beg and plead for God's love, grace or God actively seeks us. Alright, so that's prevenient grace. Just to
Justifying grace, grace.
Paul wrote to the church in Corinth in Christ. God was reconciling himself for
Not counting their trespasses against them.
God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting their trespasses,
against them. In his letter to the Roman church, Paul wrote, "But God proves his love for us that while we still were sinners, Christ died for us."
Yes.
And the best way I've come to understand that, replace the word sinner by enemy.
or something like that. Think about the person.
Now,
I know.
we're supposed to be christians right
But all of us have a person that we cannot stand to be around.
Right?
I mean, please God forgive us, but that is a reality, right? All of us have someone or someones that we cannot stand to be around, whether it's their mean to us,
And what this verse is saying is, I'm going to read it to you.
God died.
For his worst enemy.
Would you die for that person in your life?
You see, God died for us.
Sinners
or God's worst
Enemy.
Jesus died.
for us does that make sense does that help you connect with that verse God proves his love for us in that while we were still sinners or his enemy or however you want to put that so
So you understand that Christ died today.
It shows that the Lord is with us.
The justifying grace
Of god.
They point to reconciliation, pardon, restoration.
Through the work of god and christ our sins are forgiven and our relationship with god is restored
For John Wesley, the image.
Of God, which has been distorted by sin,
is renewed within us.
Through Christ's death.
Again, God's grace is a gift.
God's grace alone brings us into relationship with God.
There are no hoops.
With which we have to jump in order to please God and to be loved by God.
God
x
God has acted in Jesus Christ.
We need only to respond
In faith.
So I know that's a long review, but I wanted to connect the dots because it's very important.
I mean, quite honestly, Christianity is based on
on this idea of God's grace.
God's grace all right
So we left at this concept of justification and conversion. And conversion is when we understand God's overarching
Arching grace in this way. Amen.
Justifying grace
is the point at which involves repentance and a change in us that we call conversion. Right? Now repentance, it literally, the word literally
Literally means to stop and turn.
What do you think we're stopping in regards to our life?
sin right so we're stopping sin or we're stopping that road that we're going down that leads to sin right we're literally stopping and we're turning
Kearney, who do you think we're turning to
God, right? That's what repentance is. So we're stopping and we're redirecting our lives. That is what repentance is.
Repentance
means.
Does that make sense?
Have I put you all to sleep?
Huh?
All right. All right.
so um justifying grace is the point at which involves repentance and a change in us that we call conversion conversion again is a turnaround in our lives.
Leaving one orientation for another it may be sudden or dramatic or it may be gradual and cumulative okay now here we go folks
"'For those of us who've been raised in a church, "'it doesn't matter what church.'"
But for many of us who have been raised in a church, sometimes we get jealous of those people who have that sudden change, don't we?
Because they can say on June 14, 1966, I went to my niece.
Because God did this in my life.
Well, many of us who have been Christians all our life never have an experience.
like that we have a little bit here and a little bit here and a little bit right you understand what i'm saying it's a gradual and cumulative effect of christianity.
And
People's examples within that faith, right?
In our lives.
so there's nothing to be probably at least most of the people i've spoken with that have those sudden and dramatic changes in their life they're a little jealous of people who who
live in a Christian home.
And have that gradual experience of growing in Christian love.
But in any case, it's a new beginning, justification.
is a new beginning following Jesus' words to Nicodemus, "You must be born anew."
John 3:7.
We speak of this conversion as a rebirth.
Of new life in christ, of regeneration.
And so following Paul and Luther's lead, John Wesley called this process,
Justification.
And it's what happens when people abandon all those ineffective attempts
To justify themselves before God.
To be seen as just, quote unquote,
In God's eyes.
Through religious and moral practices, just as not work.
it's a time when god's justifying grace is experienced and accepted a time of pardon and forgiveness the time of freedom.
Freedom, right? A new piece of joy and love. Truly, we are justified by God's grace through faith.
Faith,
Romans 8 tells us bearing witness
With our spirit
That we
R.
Children of God.
All right, so what in the world is sanctifying grace? Well, if you think about it, you know, in my past, I dealt a lot with graphs, and so I think a lot with growth.
12,000,000 grafts, it helps me understand. So if prevenient grace is
The grace that comes before
By the way, anybody put together what?
It comes before.
Before salvation right so prevenient grace the grace that comes before salvation if you think on a graph It's down here then justifying grace is this
It is this time in your life when you come to Jesus, right? You have a come to Jesus moment. You give your life to Christ. You find salvation there.
in that regard and so there's a distinct change in the graph at that point and then sanctifying grace is the time from justification until the time
You die.
Now, any of you long-time United Methodists know why I went from justification up here to this, talking about sanctification. Anybody want to, anybody remember that?
What does this, what Wesley called this up here?
When you...
Huh?
Perfection, right?
Keep a hold of that. I'll talk about perfection.
In a little bit
But salvation is not stagnant.
it's not a one-time event in our lives it is the ongoing experience of god's gracious presence transforming us.
us.
Into whom God intends us to be.
That's why a community of faith is so important because the older generations and the younger generations mixed together they get to see what it means
To live as a Christian.
Right?
John Wesley described this dimension of God's grace as sanctification,
or holiness. And through God's sanctifying grace, we grow.
And mature
In our ability
To live as Jesus lived.
As we pray, as we study scriptures, as we fast, as we worship, as we share in fellowship with other Christians, we deepen our knowledge and love.
Of God.
As we respond,
With compassion to human need and work for justice in our communities, we strengthen our capacity to love.
Let's say that together.
As we respond with compassion to human need and work for justice in our communities, we strengthen our capacity to love
Of neighbor.
Our inner thoughts and motives as well as our outer actions and behavior are aligned with God's will and testify to our union
with God.
We're to press on with God's help in the path of sanctification. I know it's a fancy word, but we're talking about John Wesley here in the path of sanctification.
Perfection, we are to press on with God's help. Now, let's pray.
Both of most of you probably look at me and hear me say perfection and think,
Dear Jesus, that is never going to be in my life.
Right?
well.
Wesley didn't define perfection.
In the way of doing no wrong.
Of not making.
Mistakes.
Rather, he understood perfection,
To be a continual process of being made perfect in our love of god
And each other.
Okay?
and removing that desire to sin let's i know i'm having you read a lot but i want you to get all this guys let's read this together wesley understood it to be a continual promise
will process of being made perfect in our love of God and each other and of removing our desire to sin. Amen.
So Wesley's understanding of sanctifying grace,
or the ability to grow in love of God and others.
Naturally has consequences
And that's why he and United Methodist today insist that faith,
And good works go together.
You see,
Probably many of you were going, okay, wait,
For the last two weeks, we've read James 2.
Right?
and and i've heard nothing that you said eric even remotely makes sense for james too and that's why i wanted to connect the dots because you have to
Have to start.
With grace.
Before you can get
To James,
Two.
What we believe
Must be confirmed
By what we do. You know the old saying, the apple doesn't fall far from the tree?
That came from this concept, right?
The fruit that you produce will prove
Who you're who you belong to?
Right?
If you produce good fruit, it's evident that your inner life belongs to God. If you don't produce good fruit,
It's evident.
It doesn't matter how often you come to worship.
Right?
But if you don't produce good fruit
It's evident, it's self-evident, Wesley would say.
that
Your relationship with god is not where it needs to be
So personal salvation must be expressed
In ministry,
And mission,
To the world, we believe that Christian doctrine and Christian ethics are inseparable.
That faith should inspire
Service
The integration of personal piety and social holiness has been a symbol of our tradition
And this is where our scripture for today comes into play.
James wrote "Faith by itself"
If it has no works, what?
Faith by itself,, if it has no works, is dead.
Because of what God has done for us, we offer our lives back to God through a life of worship.
Of service.
as disciples we become active participants in god's activity in the world through mission and service folks there are many people who
who only see God because of what you do.
Does that produce pressure in your life?
It better.
You've heard the old saying sometimes the only bible that people read is
You.
What Bible?
Are people reading?
Through you.
Love of God is always linked
To love of neighbor.
And to a passionate commitment to seeking justice
and renewal in the world.
For Wesley, there was no religion but social religion. There was no holiness but social holiness.
In other words, faith always includes a social dimension according to Wesley. One cannot be a solitary Christian. That is probably one thing that I have
that I have heard more than anything else in my entire ministry.
As a pastor.
back in the farming community oh eric my my church is on the in hayfield or in the cornfield.
My church is on a tractor.
Of course here, Eric, my church is on a boat being with nature.
Right?
I know i'm meddlin
But according to one of the basic
Tenants of our Christian faith,
That is a lie.
And if the church...
Has taught you that?
That's a sin.
There is no way people can be a Christian.
And not be involved in the community of faith.
i mean that's that's not eric.
That's just...
The way it is.
One cannot be a solitary Christian.
As we grow in faith through our participation in the church community,
We are also nourished and equipped for mission and service to the world.
Have you noticed in everything, all the quotes that I have done of Wesley today, it has nothing to do with us individually?
Have you noticed that?
It always comes here and immediately goes out, doesn't it?
We are also nourished, yes, we're nourished, we're equipped, but what is the next word for mission and service to the world? It has nothing to do with me, it does.
He does it.
It has nothing to do with you or us.
We are here to be God to people in this community.
To be Jesus' hands and feet.
From Wesley's time to the present, Methodism has sought to be both a nurturing community and a servant community. Members of the old Methodist societies and classmates
Last meetings met for personal nurture, and guess what they met for personal nurture to do?
What do they do, you think?
You want to guess?
They met for personal nurture through giving to the poor.
They met for personal nurture through giving to the poor, visiting the imprisoned, and working for justice and peace in the community. They sought not only to receive the
The fullness of God's grace for themselves, but
they saw themselves existing to reform the nation and to spread scriptural holiness over the land folks do we need scriptural holiness over the land in our day
In our day and age.
And we too should follow this biblical mandate to receive the fullness of God's grace,
For ourselves, as well as work to reform the nation and promote justice through mission.
And service.
You see Paul's letter.
We began, excuse me, in Paul's letter to the Ephesians, right? For by grace you have been saved.
Through faith.
And this is not your own doing.
It is the gift of God, not the results of work so that no one
May boast.
And as true believers, we end
With James,
Right?
The brother of Jesus saying, "Show me your faith apart from your works."
And I buy my works.
We'll show you
My faith.
Can you understand?
The road,
that has been traveled.
This morning through grace.
So my question is for you today, what about you?
When we think of God's grace in this way, prevenient grace,
Justifying grace
Growing in grace or sanctifying grace
Where are you in that process?
where are you in that process?
Through your prayers spiritually
Your presence physically
you are tied monetarily and your service missionally are you allowing this church to spread the gospel to seek justice in many ways
In Benton County, to serve and provide mission and service to the area to spread scriptural holiness over our land.
Are you allowing this church,
By your prayers, your presence, your tithe, and your service.
Are you allowing this church
To be that in this community.
What are you doing?
To make your faith real.
To make your faith real to make your faith actually means something
to show your gratitude to your Creator, your Redeemer.
And the one who sustains you every single minute.
Of every single day.
So,
What is the grace that comes before?
What is the grace, the moment of salvation?
And what is the grace that we live in after we are saved?
This is just a way for us to break down
This encompassing idea of God's
Grace.
You can think of it, if you only remember how to eat an elephant, eventually you'll get to.
John Wesley's idea of grace, right?
But it helps us understand, it helps us understand that we have grace from the time of conception.
God is in our life.
Bringing us along.
Helping us long for God.
Right?
Helping us respond
To what god has done in our lives amen
Bringing us to a moment when we can get on our knees and say, Jesus, I can't do it without you.
And then helping us throughout our life.
Because we backslide and fall, right?
We get right back up.
That's all sanctifying grace.
Growing to perfection.
Which is love of God,
And love of neighbor.
Let's pray.
Dear God, we love you, and we thank you so very much.
For the challenges
That you put in our life
We thank you, God, for John Wesley and Charles Wesley and their work.
in the church
For you,
We thank you, God, for
The fact that
The ministry that began a good work in them is continuing through us today.
This idea of grace
It is
Inset deep into every single church.
Who claims
Your son.
As their savior
And as our lives individually, Lord,
We ask that you help us be your hands and your feet.
Be that so-called Bible in other people's lives so that as we live in this world,
As we go to the mountaintops of our life,
Into the deep,
Valleys of our life.
The people that are watching us and that are
and that we may be their only Bible.
May they see.
A loving Christian
It loves God.
And is working hard.
To love neighbor.
Doesn't mean we don't make mistakes, God.
And just ask that we are filled with your grace. Amen.
Help us glorify you in all that we say and think and do.
In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
And all of God's people said,